Cryptographic Architecture Proposal for Discord
Independent Security Research — May 2026

--

Discord shipped DAVE in March 2026. Voice and video are now end-to-end
encrypted across every call type — DMs, group DMs, voice channels, Go
Live. It uses MLS (RFC 9420), which is the right choice: formally
specified, IETF standardised, with native forward secrecy and
post-compromise security. Deploying it simultaneously across iOS,
Android, web, Windows, macOS, and console is real engineering. It
deserves to be said plainly.

What follows is not a criticism of what Discord has built. It is a
precise description of what remains open, and a concrete proposal for
each problem — grounded in cryptographic primitives that exist today,
have been deployed at scale elsewhere, and are auditable.

--

The open problems

The text layer has no end-to-end encryption. Every direct message,
every group DM, every server message is readable by Discord and by
any employee with sufficient access. Discord holds the master
decryption keys. This is not negligence — it is a deliberate
architectural trade-off that enables moderation, search, link
previews, and bots. The trade-off is real. So is the exposure.

Authentication tokens are static bearer credentials with no
cryptographic binding to the device that created them. A token
extracted from local storage — Electron stores them in LevelDB,
accessible in plaintext without elevated privileges — grants full
account access indefinitely, bypassing both password and two-factor
authentication. This is the dominant attack vector against Discord
accounts in 2025-2026. Entire malware families are built around it.

Metadata collection is unrestricted. IP address at every connection,
message timestamp, server membership, communication frequency,
device model, operating system, screen resolution, active
applications via Rich Presence. This data is stored in plaintext.
Metadata patterns are frequently more sensitive than message content
— they reveal relationships, schedules, and associations that
content alone does not.

In September 2025, a third-party support vendor was compromised.
Discord's own figures: 5.5 million users affected, approximately
70,000 government ID images exposed. The attackers claimed 2.1
million IDs — Discord disputes that figure. The precise number is
less important than the structural cause: the vendor had persistent,
broad access to user data in plaintext. A breach of the vendor was
equivalent to a breach of Discord's data.

Age verification requires submitting government identity documents
to third-party processors. This creates a centralised database of
identity documents with no cryptographic reason to exist. The
September 2025 breach demonstrated exactly what happens when it does.

--

Proposed solutions

-- Direct message encryption

Private conversations between two people have no legitimate reason
to be readable by a third party. The moderation argument — the
reason Discord gives for not implementing E2EE on text — applies
to public server channels, not to private exchanges. These are
categorically different surfaces and should be treated as such.

Signal Protocol solves this. It is open source, formally verified
(Cohn-Gordon et al., 2020, IEEE Security & Privacy), and deployed
by WhatsApp for over two billion users without architectural collapse.

Session establishment uses Extended Triple Diffie-Hellman (X3DH).
Each party holds a long-term identity keypair (IK), a signed medium-
term prekey (SPK), and a set of one-time prekeys (OPK). The initiator
generates a fresh ephemeral keypair (EK) per session. The shared
secret is derived from four independent DH operations:

  DH1 = DH(IK_sender,  SPK_recipient)
  DH2 = DH(EK_sender,  IK_recipient)
  DH3 = DH(EK_sender,  SPK_recipient)
  DH4 = DH(EK_sender,  OPK_recipient)
  SK  = KDF(DH1 || DH2 || DH3 || DH4)

No single key compromise breaks the session secret. DH1 provides
mutual authentication. DH2 and DH3 provide forward secrecy. DH4,
when a one-time prekey is available, provides additional protection
against replay of the initial handshake. OPK is optional — the
protocol degrades gracefully when the supply is exhausted.

Once the session is open, every message is encrypted with a unique
key produced by a ratcheting chain:

  message_key    = KDF(chain_key, 0x01)
  chain_key_next = KDF(chain_key, 0x02)
  ciphertext     = AEAD(message_key, plaintext, associated_data)

Forward secrecy and post-compromise security hold simultaneously.
A key leaked today reveals nothing about past messages. After the
next Diffie-Hellman ratchet step, it reveals nothing about future
messages either.

The implementation boundary for Discord is clean: E2EE applies to
DMs and group DMs. Public server channels remain as they are —
Discord can continue to moderate, search, and serve bots on server
content without any modification. The two surfaces are independent.
Prekeys are published to Discord's existing infrastructure. No
separate public key directory is required.

-- Token authentication

The current model treats a token as a secret that grants access.
Architecturally, it is equivalent to a password that never expires,
cannot be changed by the user, and is stored on disk in a location
accessible to any process running as the same user.

The correct model is challenge-response using asymmetric
cryptography, standardised by the W3C as WebAuthn and by the FIDO
Alliance as FIDO2. It is already deployed by Google, Apple,
Microsoft, and GitHub.

At login, the device generates an asymmetric keypair. The private
key is stored in the device's Trusted Platform Module or Secure
Enclave — hardware architecturally designed to resist extraction
even by processes with administrative privileges. The public key
is registered with Discord.

  device generates: (sk, pk) — P-256 or Ed25519
  Discord stores:   pk
  sk never leaves the device

Every subsequent API request is authenticated by signing a fresh
server-issued challenge:

  proof = SIGN(sk, HASH(request) || server_nonce || timestamp)

Discord verifies the signature against the stored public key.
Extracting the token file from disk yields a public key — useless
without the private key, which has never left the TPM.

Google's internal deployment data for passkeys shows a reduction
of over 99% in credential-based account takeovers for enrolled
users. The technology is standardised, audited, and works at scale.

For bots, which operate without a TPM: automatic token rotation
every 24 hours, with immediate revocation triggered by behavioural
anomaly — geographic inconsistency, request volume outside baseline,
or a request signed by an unregistered device fingerprint.

-- Metadata reduction

Discord currently logs raw IP addresses with every request,
message, and connection event. The IP is necessary for network
routing. It is not necessary in application-layer logs.

A rotating salt approach removes the long-term value of stored IPs
without reducing the ability to detect abuse in real time:

  daily_salt   = CSPRNG(32 bytes), rotated at midnight UTC
  stored_value = BLAKE3(ip_address || daily_salt)

Within a 24-hour window, the hash allows correlation — the same
IP produces the same hash, supporting rate limiting and abuse
detection. After salt rotation, no stored value can be reversed.
Logs older than one day become anonymised without deletion.

For direct message metadata — who communicates with whom — Sealed
Sender, deployed by Signal in 2018, removes sender visibility from
the server entirely:

  inner_envelope = ENCRYPT(recipient_pk, {sender_certificate, message})
  outer_envelope = ENCRYPT(server_pk,    {inner_envelope})

The server decrypts the outer layer to determine routing. It never
sees the inner layer and never learns who sent the message. Only
the recipient identifies the sender from the certificate embedded
in the inner envelope.

Combined with DM encryption, the server knows a message arrived
for a recipient. It knows nothing about who sent it or what it
contained.

-- Age verification without identity storage

Verifying that a user is over 18 requires confirming that a birth
date satisfies a threshold. It does not require storing a passport,
a driving licence, or any other identity document. The September
2025 breach made the cost of conflating these two things concrete.

A cryptographic commitment scheme separates them. The user commits
to their birth date using a random blinding factor:

  commitment = BLAKE3("discord-age-verify/v1/commitment" || birth_date || blinding)

The commitment is hiding: it reveals nothing about the birth date.
It is binding: the committed value cannot be changed after the fact.
The user proves that the committed date satisfies the age threshold
by revealing birth_date and blinding. Discord verifies by
recomputing the commitment independently and checking the age.

A working implementation is included in poc/src/main.rs. One
limitation is stated plainly: this is an interactive commitment
scheme, not a zero-knowledge proof in the strict sense. The verifier
receives birth_date and blinding to reconstruct the commitment. A
strict ZKP — Groth16 or PLONK over an arithmetic circuit — would
allow the verifier to check a 192-byte proof without receiving any
private input. The distinction matters and is not elided here.

  Current PoC:
    The verifier receives birth_date and blinding_factor.
    Not zero-knowledge — verifier learns the private input.
    No trusted setup required.

  Production ZKP (Groth16 over BN254):
    Proof size: 192 bytes, fixed regardless of input.
    Verifier sees the proof only. No private inputs transmitted.
    Trusted setup required — or PLONK for a universal setup.

The production path: Circom 2.0 or arkworks as circuit compiler,
BN254 or BLS12-381 as the curve. Semaphore and Anon Aadhaar are
open-source reference implementations of this exact pattern, both
production-deployed.

In either case — commitment scheme or full ZKP — no identity
document is stored. A breach of the age verification system yields
nothing, because nothing is kept.

-- Third-party data compartmentalisation

The September 2025 incident was not a breach of Discord's own
infrastructure. It was a breach of a support vendor with persistent,
broad access to user data in plaintext. The structural fix is to
ensure vendor access is cryptographically scoped — limited to the
data required for one active ticket, for the duration of that ticket.

Per-ticket encryption with time-limited derived keys:

  prk        = HKDF-Extract(master_salt, vendor_id || ticket_id || expiry_unix)
  ticket_key = HKDF-Expand(prk, "discord/v1/support-ticket", 32)
  ciphertext = ChaCha20-Poly1305(ticket_key, support_data)

The vendor receives the ciphertext and a ticket_key valid only for
that ticket's lifetime. When the ticket closes, the key is not
renewed. The vendor cannot read its own previous sessions without
a current derived key. A breach exposes only currently open tickets
— not 8.4 million historical ones.

Government ID images specifically should not be stored at all. The
commitment scheme above makes storage unnecessary. A system that
does not collect identity documents cannot lose them.

--

What is not proposed here

Fully Homomorphic Encryption for moderation on encrypted server
messages is not a near-term proposal. Computing moderation decisions
on ciphertext is mathematically possible. At Discord's scale — hundreds
of millions of messages per day — the computational overhead is not
within reach on any realistic hardware horizon for this decade. This
document does not propose it.

Oblivious RAM for hiding access patterns has the same constraint.
MegaBlocks (ACM CCS 2025) advances the state of the art materially,
but the per-access overhead remains impractical at Discord's scale.
Worth monitoring as hardware improves.

Multi-party computation for distributed moderation requires
infrastructure restructuring well beyond the scope of cryptographic
primitives. Not proposed here.

--

Priority and timeline

  Token binding via WebAuthn/FIDO2             3 to 6 months
  IP hashing with rotating daily salt          4 weeks
  Commitment scheme for age verification       available now
  E2EE for DMs and group DMs                  6 to 12 months
  Vendor key compartmentalisation              6 to 12 months
  Sealed Sender for DMs                        12 to 18 months
  Production ZKP for age verification          12 to 18 months

--

References

Cohn-Gordon, K., Cremers, C., Dowling, B., Garratt, L., Stebila, D.
  (2020). A Formal Security Analysis of the Signal Messaging Protocol.
  IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy.

Marlinspike, M., Perrin, T. (2016). The X3DH Key Agreement Protocol.
  Signal Foundation.

Marlinspike, M., Perrin, T. (2016). The Double Ratchet Algorithm.
  Signal Foundation.

Barnes, R., Beurdouche, B., Robert, R., Millican, J., Omara, E.,
  Cohn-Gordon, K. (2023). RFC 9420 — The Messaging Layer Security
  Protocol. IETF.

W3C Web Authentication (WebAuthn) Level 3. W3C Recommendation, 2025.

FIDO Alliance. Client to Authenticator Protocol (CTAP) 2.2. 2024.

Groth, J. (2016). On the Size of Pairing-Based Non-interactive
  Arguments. Eurocrypt 2016. LNCS 9666.

Bernstein, D.J. (2006). Curve25519: New Diffie-Hellman Speed Records.
  Public Key Cryptography — PKC 2006. LNCS 3958.

Semaphore. Zero-knowledge group membership protocol.
  Ethereum Foundation, 2023. github.com/semaphore-protocol

Anon Aadhaar. ZKP-based identity verification without data exposure.
  Privacy and Scaling Explorations, 2024.

Asharov, G., Komargodski, I., Lin, W., Peserico, E., Shi, E. (2025).
  MegaBlocks: Breaking the Logarithmic I/O-Overhead Barrier for ORAM.
  ACM CCS 2025.

BleepingComputer (October 2025). Discord breach via third-party support
  vendor exposed data of 5.5 million users.

Discord (October 2025). Official statement on third-party support
  system security incident.

